# Yet another attempt on a cmake intro...
- 2022-09-08: Updated links etc. 
  - Ninja now works for fortran as well.
- 2021-11-11: Transfer to franklin+github.io
- 2014-10-30: Initial version

\toc
CMake is the current fashion in build systems. It is not perfect (e.g. the learning curve) but
better  than its predecessors.

<!-- more -->


## Some advantages of cmake:

(if you know how to use them...)

- Cross platform portability. Linux, MacOSX, Windows are fully supported.
- Interaction with native build tools (UNIX make, MacOSX xcode,  Visual studio).
- Inbuilt support of   unit tests.
- Easy handling of out-of-source builds.

## Resources on cmake

- [Home page](http://www.cmake.org/)
- [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMake)
- [Documentation (latest version)](http://www.cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/)
- [Tutorial (cmake home page)](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/guide/tutorial/index.html)
- [Tutorials (as found by Google)](https://www.google.de/search?q=cmake+tutorial)
- "CMake for busy scientists" by Radovan Bast turned into the [CMake cookbook](https://www.packtpub.com/product/cmake-cookbook/9781788470711)

Ok, so let us start  with the *very* basics. Why in hell we do we need this ?

## Edit-Compile-Link-Execute-Fail-Edit-Compile...

This is  the infinite Karma cycle  of the  programmer who works  with classical
*compiled* languages like C/Fortran/C++.  With the widespread adoption
of *interpreted*  languages (in particular  matlab) it is  not obvious
that even university alumni have been exposed to this workflow. Still, compiled
languages with respect to portability and speed are the best choice. It is
not excluded that this situation will change in the not so distant future...
which  is not here yet.

The source code for the demo test can be  found in
[tinyproject.zip](/assets/tinyproject.zip)


### Edit 
So let us start with a small program in a file `hello.c`:

````
#include <stdio.h>
int main (int argc, char *argv[]) 
{
   printf("Hello world!\n");
   return 0;
}
````
It can be *compiled*, *linked* and *executed* from the command line:
````
$ cc -o hello hello.c
$ hello
Hello world!
````
Now, our program shall do something more useful, by calling
a function from a module described in `infinitecycle.h`

````
int infcyc(int start); /* call infinite cycle and return result*/
````
and `infinitecycle.c`:

````
#include "infinitecycle.h"
int infcyc(int start)
{
  int result;
  result=start;
  for (;result<42;result++);
  return result;
}
````

Our program now looks like
````
#include <stdio.h>
#include "infinitecycle.h"
int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  int answer;
  answer=infcyc(0);
  printf("Hello world, the answer is %d!\n",answer);
  return 0;
}
````
To put this together, we call
````
$ cc -o hello hello.c infinitecycle.c
$ hello
Hello world, the answer is 42!
````

### Compile
The `cc` command above performs several process steps.
It *compiles* the  code into *object files* which already
contain something like the machine code.

````
$ cc -c -o hello.o hello.c
$ cc -c -o infinitecycle.o infinitecycle.c
````

### Link
These object files have to be *linked* together and with system libraries containing
e.g. the `printf` function and other voodoo. The program which performs this step
is called *linker* or *loader* (`ld` on Unix):

````
$ ld -o hello hello.o infinitecycle.o -m elf_x86_64 -dynamic-linker /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2  /usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../../../lib64/crt1.o /usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../../../lib64/crti.o /usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/crtbegin.o -L/usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8 -L/usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../../../lib64 -L/lib/../lib64 -L/usr/lib/../lib64 -L/usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../../../x86_64-suse-linux/lib -L/usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../.. -lgcc --as-needed -lgcc_s --no-as-needed -lc -lgcc --as-needed -lgcc_s --no-as-needed /usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/crtend.o /usr/lib64/gcc/x86_64-suse-linux/4.8/../../../../lib64/crtn.o
````

Larger collections of object files can be put  together into *libraries*
(*archives*), just for the example we make an archive of one object file:

````
$ ar cvr libfinite.a infinitecycle.o
a - infinitecycle.o
````
These archives can be  used to link with them rather than with the
collection of object files they contain. In  order not to have
to write all the voodoo shown above, it is customary in Unix that the
compiler commands know how to link the code, so it suffices to invoke

````
$ cc -o hello hello.o libfinite.a
````

#### Working with larger projects 

Now this  is essentially  the way one  puts together  larger projects,
possibly from  different sources,  e.g. a  graphics library  with some
numerical code. The result of the  installation of the library is that
we  have somewhere  in  our  system the  *header*  (`.h`) files  which
describe to  the compiler  how to  interface the  code, and  a library
(`.a`) or *shared library* (`.so`) which contains the code.  Also, for
a larger project we put the  code written by ourselves onto libraries.
When developing, we want to have two things at once:

- after changing something,  we want to have some  magic which repeats
  the compilation and linking process automatically

- we do not want a recompile  of everything after changing only a tiny
  bit of code

On UNIX (and MacOSX), Makefiles  are used to describe the dependencies
between  the  pieces  of  code.

###  Fail...
In  order  to  work  properly,  all
dependencies  have to  be written  into such  a file.  Cumbersome, and
error prone, especially for larger projects... E.g. we have to trace
all the `#include` statements and write the corresponding dependencies
into the Makefile.

## CMake to the rescue!

CMake essentially  is the  tool which automates  this process.   At the
same time it can generate other dependency descriptions as well, e.g.
for [ninja](http://martine.github.io/ninja/).

### `CMakeLists.txt` for project description

CMake relies on a project description in a file `CMakeLists.txt`.  For
larger projects,  this file is much  easier to write than  a `Makefile`.
In particular,  it automatically traces all  dependencies. By default,
it generates a standard Unix Makefile  which is then used for the real
build.

So let us try this for our tiny project. We add the following
file `CMakeLists.txt` to our project directory:
```
#
# Minimal  version required for CMake
#
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.8)

#
# Project name and languages used
# may be C, CXX and  FORTRAN
#
project(tiny C)

#
# Add source file(s) to a library
#
add_library(finite infinitecycle.c)

#
# Define an executable depending on some source(s)
#
add_executable(hello hello.c)

#
# Add library(ies)  to link with the executable
#
target_link_libraries(hello finite)
```

### Out-Of-Source Workflow


The  following workflow  is  not  the only  one  possible, but  highly
recommended. It is called  *out-of-source build* and essentially boils
down  to the  fact that  everything which  is generated  during the  build
process is placed into the  *build* directory. *Nothing* is created in
the source  tree. This is  of high practical  value if one  works with
different  build  configurations  (debug/release), compilers  or  even
operating systems from the same source directory.

````
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ cmake ..
$ cd ..
$ make -C build
$ .build/hello
Hello world, the answer is 42!
````

Now we found out that the cycle in `infcyc` is finite. So we change
the header file `infinitecycle.h` (it is too late to change the name of the function
as lots of people are using it. At least we remark this in the comment... ):
````
/* well, it is finite, but we don't want to break the API*/
int infcyc(int start); /* call infinite cycle and return result*/
````
We invoke the recompile:
```
$ make -C build
Scanning dependencies of target finite
[ 50%] Building C object CMakeFiles/finite.dir/infinitecycle.c.o
Linking C static library libfinite.a
[ 50%] Built target finite
Scanning dependencies of target hello
[100%] Building C object CMakeFiles/hello.dir/hello.c.o
Linking C executable hello
[100%] Built target hello
```
This demonstrates that CMake built a Makefile for us which
contains the dependency of `hello.c` and `infinitecycle.c` on
`infinitecycle.h`.

### ninja

Just for demonstration, we perform a build with ninja.  Ninja is a replacement of 
make which is much faster than make, and it can work efficiently in parallel.
So it makes a difference in large projects.
````
$ mkdir build-ninja
$ cd build-ninja
$ cmake -G Ninja ..
$ cd ..
$ ninja -C build-ninja
$ build-ninja/hello
Hello world, the answer is 42!
````
The previous example could have used `cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" ..`
which  is the default on Unix.
Please remark as well that the `build` and `build-ninja` subdirectories
coexist without problems.

### Automatic test

Automatic tests  are a great  tool to  verify the correctness  of code
modifications. CMake provides some infrastructure for this.

Let us add the following lines to `CMakeLists.txt`
```
#
# Enable testing
#
enable_testing()

#
# Run hello in test mode
#
add_test(universe  hello -test)
```

and add a test mode to our program which now looks like

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "infinitecycle.h"
int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  int test_mode;
  test_mode=0;
  if ( argc>1 && (strcmp(argv[1],"-test")==0))
    test_mode=1;

  int answer;
  answer=infcyc(0);
  printf("Hello world, the answer is %d!\n",answer);

  if (test_mode && answer!=42)
    {
      printf("broken universe\n");
      return 1;
    }
	
  return 0;
}
```
And now

```
$make -C build
[ 50%] Built target finite
Scanning dependencies of target hello
[100%] Building C object CMakeFiles/hello.dir/hello.c.o
Linking C executable hello
[100%] Built target hello
$make -C build test
Running tests...
Test project /home/fuhrmann/Wias/www/fuhrmann/drafts/tinyproject/build
    Start 1: universe
1/1 Test #1: universe .........................   Passed    0.00 sec

100% tests passed, 0 tests failed out of 1

Total Test time (real) =   0.00 sec
```

