# Remote access to mercurial repository

(2014-12-14)

When allowing others to clone  a mercurial repository, it is important
to organize easy and stable access,  which works as well from behind a
firewall.  We discuss  two methods  from our daily pratice which  allow to
organize this.

<!-- more -->

## Resources

-  [Mercurial homepage on publishing  repositories](http://mercurial.selenic.com/wiki/PublishingRepositories)
-  [(Outdated) mercurial homepage on multiple committers](http://mercurial.selenic.com/wiki/MultipleCommitters)
-  [ssh forced command](http://binblog.info/2008/10/20/openssh-going-flexible-with-forced-commands/)
-  [hg-ssh description](https://sites.google.com/site/ucdcsssg/announcements/howtocollaborateusingmercurialwithhg-ssh)




## Intranet access via `hg serve`
Mercurial has  a built-in  web server  which allows  to easily  set up
remote access to a repository. It is just like this (issued on `myhost.institute.com`):

````
myhost$ hg serve --daemon --port 8100
````

This command starts the server and makes it available under the URLS

````
http://myhost.institute.com:8100
````

and (being logged into system `myhost`)

````
http://localhost:8100
````

The URL can be used  to browse the repository and to clone it.

By  default  it is  not  possible  to  push  changes to  a  repository
published  this way.  Pushing has  to  be explicitely  allowed in  the
config file by setting

````
[web]
push_ssl=false
allow_push=*
````

A  repository published  this way  can be  **read by  everyone who  is
allowed to  access port  8100 on host  myhost.institute.com** Moreover,
this connection  is unencrypted. As  a consequence, this  method makes
sense only  in an intranet  with trusted  users behind a  firewall. It
should be  noted, that  instead of `*`,  a list of  user names  can be
written, but this authentication would not be very safe.

## Remote  access via `hg serve` and ssh tunnel


From  behind  a  firewall,  there  is the  option  to  access  such  a
repository from outside  for any user who can access  the intranet via
[`ssh`](2014-12-13-ssh.html). Let us assume, that  the host `gate.institute.com` is the system
which allows ssh login from outside  and `sees` `myhost`.  Log in from
your laptop `mylaptop` to `gate.institute.com` using the command

````
mylaptop$ ssh  5000:myhost:8100 gate.institute.com
````

This forwards port 8100 from `myhost` to `mylaptop` and can be accessed
under the URL

````
http://localhost:5000
````

It is worth to note, that, being tunneled by `ssh`, this connection is
encrypted and can be assumed to be a safe way to access the repository
from outside.



## Remote access via ssh

If the repository you want to publish resides at `gate.institute.com`
in the subdirectory `myrepo`, you can access it via `ssh`:

````
hg clone ssh://gate.institute.com/myrepo
````

For decent handling it is advisable to set up
[public key authentication](2014-12-13-ssh.html#public-key-authentication) and
[password free login](2014-12-13-ssh.html#password-less-login-identity-management-by-ssh-agent).

Through this approach it is possible to grant remote repository access
to  others. If  you  add the  public  key of  your  colleague to  your
`.ssh/authorized_keys` file, she can clone you repository via

````
hg clone ssh://yourusername@gate.institute.com/myrepo
````

However **this would allow your colleague  to access all of your data**.

SSH and mercurial  provide the  following mechanism  to fix  this situation:

- In the `.ssh/authorized_keys` file, it is
  possible            to             specify    along with the public key of another person                one 
  single [forced command](http://binblog.info/2008/10/20/openssh-going-flexible-with-forced-commands/)
  which can be remotely executed by this person.

- With mercurial, there comes the
  [hg-ssh](https://sites.google.com/site/ucdcsssg/announcements/howtocollaborateusingmercurialwithhg-ssh)
  command which provides the possibility to dispatch mercurial access.


Together this can be configured in `.ssh/authorized_keys` by prefixing
the the public key of your  colleague by specifying the forced command
along with further security relevant access options:


````
command="/path/to/hg-ssh myrepo",no-port-forwarding,no-X11-forwarding,no-pty ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABAQCvyyza7e8tFrBhNMRd/3w+XL9PIeSNTUC+PcHOQI7kcfk4oTDnfysTkPleM3fM+r588sDRWKa7eivLoZ7NCF3EgMd0HUUVHjWbWZgF7KXylu4dcsDMvANH5BlgWysFqxzaTzy8CX8E03NYSkn5kqzgtnkIm+Z/QzLd4mq48oG9Ns3uPlhU4Wf2XGEqV/6EtLvHgAG/PtUP1kofO74oit2d8BH3fkU0UCMBlZqVCAoefFnR4qg3c18McK3dGhM741dpopeD3E+zaJ55AS9nIZFdbkOZNsrQR+FbzmwkqQDwQ060De5XijqdU3VD64xxHeQeFtgHG/LqAOCaUTzVtKzx fuhrmann@jfzbook.wias-berlin.de
````


Using the same  command as above, your college now  has full mercurial
access to the `myrepo` repository. No  other access to your account is
possible for her.  Please be aware  that she accesses all files in the
repository  under  your  username.   When  committing,  the  name  she
specivies in her `.hgrc` file is recorded.

For general usage  it is advisable to use a  special account dedicated
only  to repository  access  which differs  from  your normal  working
account.

